= FlexDate

Flexible dates for Ruby.

Written by Alex Reisner (alex@alexreisner.com).


== The Problem

Imagine you are collecting dates of historic events but you don't always have
exact dates. For example, you might know that an event occurred in March of
1862 but you don't know the exact day. You could store this as a Ruby Date
object that looks like '1862-03-01' but, really, you don't want to specify a
day at all. You want to <b>explicitly not store</b> the day part of the date.


== The Solution

FlexDate addresses this problem by extending Ruby's included Date class.
At the moment the following methods are provided to create partial dates:

  FlexDate.new(year = nil, month = nil, date = nil)
  year=(int)
  month=(int)
  day=(int)

Where a full date (year, month, and day) is specified, a FlexDate behaves
exactly like a normal Ruby Date. When a partial date is specified, only the
following methods will behave as desired:

  year
  month
  day
  strftime


== Installation

To install FlexDate, use the standard Rails plugin installation script:

  script/plugin install git://github.com/alexreisner/flex_date.git 


== Integration with Rails/ActiveRecord

The MultipartDate module facilitates integration of FlexDate with
ActiveRecord models. It requires that you store each date in three separate
columns, each with a _y, _m, or _d suffix. So, if you have a Person model that
stores birthdays, the columns required would be (all integers):

  birthday_y
  birthday_m
  birthday_d

Then, simply put this in your Person model (you can list multiple attributes if
needed):

  multipart_date :birthday

and you'll be able to do things like this:

  # Initialize a new Person object.
  p = Person.new(:birthday_y => 1964, :birthday_m => 8, :birthday_d => 23)
  
  # See if their birthday is set.
  p.birthday?   
    => true

  # Get their birthday as a FlexDate object.
  b = p.birthday
    => #<FlexDate:0xb78b542c ...>
  
  # Display their birthday nicely.
  p.birthday.to_s(:long)
    => "August 23, 1964"

But the real advantage is that, because you're using FlexDate, you can store
partial dates so you don't need to know the year to store the month and day of
someone's birthday.

I've also written another Rails plugin called Informant which provides a
full-featured FormBuilder class, and includes a <tt>multipart_date_select</tt>
field type which is a good compliment to MultipartDate in your Rails
application. Install Informant from my Git repository:

  script/plugin install git://github.com/alexreisner/informant.git 


== Code Discussion

You might expect FlexDate to be a subclass of Date, but this is not the case.
That implementation would be far more complicated because the instance methods
of Date require certain instance variables to be set, and to meet certain
requirements for validity. Massaging the Date class to accept an invalid
date seems like the wrong approach for the modest goals of FlexDate, which is
simply to allow storing of partial dates, and duplicate the behavior
of the Date class <b>when a date is complete</b>.

So instead, FlexDate is a very simple class that inherits from nothing,
provides some (hopefully) useful methods for partial dates, and uses
<tt>method_missing</tt> to fall back to Date when a FlexDate object is
complete (specifies year, month, and day).

Any comments or suggestions regarding this design are welcome.


== To-do List

* <tt>MultipartDate::multipart_date</tt> should also generate a setter method. 
* Fix: <tt>FlexDate#strftime</tt> returns empty string if any part of the format string is not printable. Should print what it can (is this really useful?).
* Make date arithmetic work (Date minus FlexDate works, but neither FlexDate minus Date or FlexDate minus FlexDate works). 


Copyright (c) 2008 Alex Reisner (alex@alexreisner.com), released under the MIT license.
